---
title: It matters just as much
author: en
---

The lack of permanence in the world, at least, is difficult to dispute.
There are no counterexamples; *this universe itself* seems opposed to the
notion, given that the laws of thermodynamics seem to guarantee an end state
at equilibrium,^[Alternatively the universe could expand quickly enough that
equilibrium is never reached, but then the energy density becomes ultimately
low enough no structure exists.] the past unascertainable---true permanence
in this world is essentially restricted to unit.

Permanence as a concept is eminently conceivable and deeply attractive; yet
no amount of human effort can achieve it. Perhaps it is natural, then, that
our literature and mythology so often place it strictly under the purview of
the divine, or at least mystical. This is as much true in the *Gilgamesh* as
in classical and Abrahamic mythologies: eternal, permanent life is granted
to Utnapishtim and his wife only by the grace of the god Enlil; the secret
plant which restores youth is a mystery of the gods; man is allotted death,
but life remains in the gods' own keeping.

Yet in *this* world, there does not appear to be permanence, even from the
gods, so it might follow that there is, ultimately, no meaning in
anything---if all will end in time in uniform insignificance anyway.

Still, people *do* "get up and go about their business". If there is no
meaning, must there not be at least some driving force, some reason to
continue?

Some, perhaps, have never truly believed in the fundamental impermanence of
the world. Afterlives, after all---particularly those in which one's lot is
determined by judgment of one's actions in life---are a recurring theme in
the world's mythologies. By introducing an independent measure of meaning,
the transience of *this* life becomes irrelevant: it matters just as much as
the *next* life matters. Whether in a system of reincarnation, as in the
dharmic tradition, or of eternal afterlives, as in the Abrahamic tradition,
the work of the present life is in anticipation of the life yet to come.

But for the others---even if for no other reason, even if there truly is not
meaning to life, people do and will continue for a long time to get up and
act. The tyranny of natural selection assures it, because impermanence
means, in the end, everyone dies.

Even if impermanence makes everything hold no meaning, action is no less
meaningful than inaction, and no action any more or less than any other. So,
perhaps, when everyone is dead, some may have left offspring---offspring
which, as in any other sustainable self-replicating system, have derived
their traits from their parents, and thus have likely inherited some
tendency to produce offspring. Once the initial generations have died off,
only the offspring remain; those which could not (or would not) reproduce
become lost forever to the impermanence of the world.

Thus, even if the amount of meaning is exactly the same, whether or not we
act, there should be, in all possible worlds, far fewer people who do go on
with their lives than who do not. Since our ability to observe the world is
predicated on our presence in it, there is consequently an anthropic bias
favouring a world in which most humans actually do get out of bed in the
morning.

Still, we all will die. We will have mattered.

<div>
![star: you mattered](http://25.media.tumblr.com/tumblr_mb561tQBBT1ryxb9zo1_250.png)
</div>

Eventually, we will not matter; just as we ourselves cannot achieve
permanence, neither can our influence: as time goes on, we are forgotten,
and our actions become inconsequential.

But as impermanent as they are, the actions have a *persistence* without
well-defined limit. The effects of self-replication in particular, for
example, extend indefinitely and are *distinctly inherent* to all life: even
if they are not meaningful, they at least remain; each individual has been
born to a lineage which, in every generation, reproduced.

The *sole motive* (if it can be called that) life has or needs is its own
propagation. Life may not have a meaning, but neither does it need one: most
of us will get up in the morning and go about our business anyway.

Some won't. It matters just as much.
